All right. What's up, y'all? We're back for another Polymath Salon, this time with your
boy, Olan Berenholz, Mr. Autoregression. Take a shot every time he says it. What do you have
for us today? This is actually going to be airing after his big Wolfram Institute live stream.
Well, it happens to be fresh in my mind because I just had a really fascinating conversation
this morning. Benjamin Lyons. Well, Benjamin is the one who teed the whole thing up,
but I was meeting with Eli Senesh and Jordan Thinolt-Brown, and it was just a really awesome
conversation. They both work on constructivist theories of emotion, and there was a lot to
talk about on that front, but the thing that's been rattling around in my brain is a particular
point that we ended up sort of honing in on, and it was the question of whether the brain
does categories or whether it's only language that does categories. And I found this a really
intriguing question that really touches deeply on to what extent language is discontinuous
with the rest of cognition. So the way that the conversation sort of started was, if I remember
correctly, that they were putting forth, or at least I think Eli was a little bit agnostic on this,
they were putting forth the idea that cognition already does categorization, that we have all
this, you know, blooming kind of complexity, and then our brain kind of sorts things into bins
and in order to be able to effectively respond to that, to those things. And that language would
then be like sort of the capstone of that. That language is like, okay, we already have a category
dog, and then we have a label in language for that category. I don't know if I agree with that,
and in fact, it got me really thinking about whether language, again, is this kind of really
discontinuous kind of symbolic system, and that nothing like that existed prior language, and that
one way to think about this is non-linguistic species. Do cats have a category of cat? Do cats
have a category, and they were talking about like emotions, does cats have a category of another animal
or themselves being angry? Or... It's like the thoughts are doing the thinking kind of idea.
Well, in the linguistic case, it's the thoughts are doing the thinking, and the word cat and
the word angry, surely, they have very specific kind of meaning in the context of language,
and they do certain kinds of things. They predict, they fit into the predictive stream, the auto-aggressive,
there it is, auto-aggressive predictive string...
All right, I got my shot right here.
Oh, here we go. It's just water, unfortunately. But the...
That role is very well defined within the linguistic systems, as captured by the language models.
But what about in our... What about in our non-linguistic system? Do we...
Now, so what's the alternative? Everybody might be scratching your head and being like, what do you mean?
Of course, there's a category cat. When I see cat, I think cat. And it's true. When you think...
When you see cat, when you see a cat, you, first of all, have the word cat. But the point is, we're ignoring that, right?
Forget about the linguistic label. But then you'd be like, well, I have a category of cats.
Like, there are these fuzzy things that have whiskers and, you know, tend to kind of seem to like people,
but also want to eat them at the same time and stuff. And we have this idea of, like, what a cat is.
And my argument would be, well, no, I don't think you necessarily have a category of cat.
It's just that we have a cluster of features that tend to predict certain kinds of maybe behaviors on our part,
like petting it or if you don't like cats, walking away from it.
And it's a perfectly apt example. It's a fuzzy category.
And it's not really category at all. It's really just that some particular set of features, some particular, you know,
maybe visual features or whatever that we view lends itself to certain kinds of behaviors.
But there isn't any sort of binary categorization happening.
Maybe our brains and animal brains, besides language, don't really category stuff.
Maybe there isn't really some sort of fixed, like, binary threshold.
Like, okay, now it's a cat and we're going to do stuff.
It's just that things get, it happens to be that cats are pretty clustered, right?
There's like, you don't usually have things that are not, that are very, that have lots of those features.
And then maybe, or, but a bunch of other features that aren't like that.
But that's sort of like the natural world takes care of that.
It happens to be the things that tend to do these things cluster together.
But it may be our brain is just remembering that clustering.
And then the clustering leads to the behavior.
But that doesn't mean that there's anything like a category of cat.
So I'm trying to be as nihilistic as I can in relation to classic cognitive science.
Constructs, because I think that's a healthy exercise.
And also because I think it's getting me somewhere in thinking about how the mind and the brain work.
And in this case, I'm throwing out the idea that we should throw out the idea of categories altogether in thinking about how the mind works, independent of language.
Now, language, there's this word cat, and there's this word sad, and there's this word words.
And these things certainly are discrete, right?
And in the large language models, they're incredibly discrete.
It's just a, it's literally a point in the space.
And so it's a long vector, but in that hyperdimensional vector space, it's a point.
And it isn't smeared out.
And it does stuff as that specific label and that particular symbol.
Although it just occurred to me, it went off in my head, that once you get into self-attention, and once you're started doing the, once you start to do mix together all the, and I know that not everybody uses this terminology, but once you start mixing all the values,
to form the representation of the token in the, in sort of the forward pass in the residual stream, you do end up sticking together a whole bunch of tokens in the representation of, in this representation.
But independent of that, if we think about a sequence, you know, the word cat really has sort of a discrete kind of symbolic representation in language.
And, and, and in the way we talk, we use the word, it's, it's, it's like, I'm saying cat or I'm not, I'm not, you know, claiming that we don't have words.
I'm claiming that what's going on is that language and words have the thinking about those has bled into our thinking about other kinds of cognitive structures.
And it's possible, although I'm not saying this is categorically true, but I'm saying it may be true, that our brain really doesn't do categories.
And I'm sure all the category people will come at me with, you know, sharpened spears and say, well, I have all kinds of non-linguistic evidence for things like binary categories.
And I welcome that those attacks and I don't know if I'm prepared to defend against them, but I suspect that I, you know, I am up on that literature to some extent.
I certainly am not up on the most recent literature, but I've certainly followed that literature across my career.
And I am a little bit skeptical that the kinds of tasks that people are often given in these category tasks, very often they are kind of naming tasks.
Is this an example of a blick or whatever, some made up category.
And what you're doing then is, is you're usually doing essentially a kind of pseudo linguistic task.
And so real question, right, the question I want to raise, and I really would like to hear people's responses.
And, you know, and, and come at me.
Are there really, does the brain do categorization?
Or does language just do categorization?
And it has the, the focus in cognitive science on the idea of categories as to really being a category, the entire concept of a category.
Is it really meaningful?
Or are we just capturing something that's really just a spillover from the fact that we use language to talk about all of these things?
And I just want to add one, one point.
And I think this is brought up by Eli in the conversation.
You know, that neurons themselves, in some ways, seem to kind of be doing discrete kinds of things.
They certainly fire discreetly.
Although, as I pointed out, they also do have sort of continuous membrane potential buildup.
And the action potential probably isn't, isn't, certainly isn't the whole story about how neurons are actually encoding and even transmitting information.
And, you know, that's kind of a discrete event, an action potential.
And, and I pointed out, you know, in kind of support of that view is that the nonlinearities in neural networks are in some ways this, this, this, the whole point of it is to kind of have a kind of discrete kind of almost like a categorization, like so that you can say up to here is this, and then past that threshold is this.
And I agree with that, that neurons in some ways are doing discrete things.
However, in the aggregate, and certainly at the computational level, I'm not convinced that the neurons aren't ultimately carrying out a much fuzzier kind of, of math, and that we're meaningfully necessarily doing anything like a category.
And, and again, people talk about fuzzy categories and all those kinds of things, but in the, in the end, the idea is that you're either.
Could you say a neuron is a category of a group of chemicals and particles in a sense?
A neuron, well, our word neuron.
It's, it's, it's, well, okay.
The actual physiological neuron is a category.
I'm not sure that would be, I, you know, I don't, so now I'm, I'm, I'm skeptical of the, the idea that, that we can really even think about categories in the brain.
Um, but you could think about, so you have like a grandmother neuron and people talk about that.
Uh, and so it's a longstanding conversation about how neurons encode information and whether there's like a neuron that is kind of discreetly fires and responds to a particular category or not.
And yes, that is, that is certainly an idea.
Uh, that's been floating around.
What I'm, what I'm more saying is how do you, how do you define a category in like very plain terms?
Me personally.
So now I'm defining it as something that has a particular label or doesn't.
And in which case I would say it's a, a linguistic construct.
That's my definition.
And, and those are fighting words to some extent, because I'm, I'm saying that it, it, it, it doesn't transcend just.
Whether or not something earns a particular linguistic label.
Now that, and that's, that's an interesting conversation.
It's all right.
When do people use the label cat?
Um, and, and, you know, that word, and when does that happen behaviorally?
But I'm not convinced that it's anything more than that or more, or more general than that.
Uh, so my, my, you know, it's a very, in some ways, a very neat definition.
Category is, uh, the set of properties under which people would apply a certain label, uh, to something.
And like, what does that pick out?
Well, that, that's the operational definition.
And so it's just a behavior.
It's a linguistic behavior that people tend to call these things cups.
And, and so what's the category of cups, the things that people tend to use that label for.
Right.
But it could be used for many other things.
It's sort of dependent to the observer.
What will the work of the, the label cup?
There's a cup.
I mean, when you say cup, it's, it's for this specific use case.
Right.
But it could be used.
And that's where it's, it gets, it, it, it certainly gets, uh, complicated.
It's not simple by any means.
And that's where the whole ungrounded language thing comes in.
And that's, that's a big part of my, uh, you know, my, the, the, the big epiphany was in fact, that there's, there's no grounding.
And that the word cup, the, even the term cup doesn't really pick out any natural kind.
It's not like there's a bunch of things that, that are somehow, you know, it reaches out into the world and, and picks out those things.
But we do have a word cup and there's certain times we use it, but I could say there's not a cup on the table.
And that means there's no visual, there's no visual correspondence to what I'm not, not being a cup on the table.
But, but I would just say that there is linguistic behavior of naming stuff and it's naming objects, but then we can refer to them in some ways, not referring to any specific visuals, things or physical things.
Cause we could talk about their non-existence and things like that.
Um, I think, uh, Kurt had put, put a post about non-existence and stuff, and it looked like a philosophical, uh, kind of, uh, you know, uh, to me, it looked like the kind of thing where you could, you could end up, um, in a loop.
But in my case, I, I really tried to, I'm thinking of this very concretely, that there's a behavior of naming, um, and you don't have to get that philosophical about it.
That's the thing. It's, it's, it's not like Kripke and naming all the, you know, all the, in all possible worlds with this thing, forget that.
Um, it's really just about a behavior of, of using this, this term.
This term and that's it. Now, how does that term end up being useful in the world in relation to physical objects and stuff?
That is all TBD, um, in relation to this theory.
Um, but we see from the language models that the word cup can be just this abstract thing that just plays the role in the dance of symbols and nothing else.
I like that phrase, dance of symbols. That's, that's, that's what language is.
That's your, that's your new presentation title, the dance of symbols.
The dance of symbols. And, and so they're just doing an internal dance and they are, there's not anything.
A symbolic ensemble.
That's not bad. That's good too. Um, so yeah. So what does the word cup mean in NLM?
Well, it doesn't mean physical objects with a certain property or something. What it means is the impact that that token will have in generating other tokens.
Um, and you know, if you say I have a cup and I have this bottle, uh, filled with liquid, what can I do now?
Well, the LLM can tell you, well, one of the things you can do is pour that liquid into that cup.
Um, if you say I don't have a cup and I have this bottle of liquid, it'll say, well, if you don't have a cup, you're gonna have to drink it straight from the bottle.
Right. So it will do everything that cups are supposed to do in that stream of linguistic stream.
The bigger, you know, the, the, the puzzle of course is, well, how does such a system, which is auto regressive, which is a little generative.
It contains all the properties necessary in the corpus to continue itself and to generate itself.
How does it actually, you know, tell you that this object is sitting on my desk so that when you walk into the room, you'll know you can, you'll have something to use to drink.
And that certainly happens. And I want to be very clear. I'm not denying that language has this functionality, but at the same time, it also is inherently auto generative.
The symbols themselves are, are just doing their dance. Somehow there's also a coordination with other systems.
So when I say to you, I have a cup on my desk, you actually get images of a cup, uh, or images in your head.
Um, and when I say images of a cup, now you, you see how.
Hey, Fantasia, what about people with that?
I mean, well, and also.
I have, I have to do it. I have to do it. I have to do it.
So it's, it's, it's definitely, uh, it, you know, and, and we could talk about it.
And then there's, and there's people, I forget, I don't even remember the term, uh, but people don't have the inner monologue and all that kind of stuff.
Um, but for those of us, would you get the image of the cup?
And even if you don't, when, when you walk into the room, you know, the couple and you see it.
Um, and so you're going to behave appropriately to it. That all of course happens, but the story of how that happens, uh, is going to be very different than saying that the word and somehow actually picks out that thing in some direct sense.
It's not, it's not the right story. Um, it's going to be, um, something closer to an auto-regressive, um, behavior generative system.
It's not just that the, the, the words generate other words, but the words generate other behaviors in, in conjunction with other sensory perceptual, um, kinds of activity as well.
So that's, uh, that's, that's what's on my mind about, um, about the, uh, sort of whether language is built on, uh, preexisting sort of categorical kinds of constructs in the mind slash brain.
Or whether it was truly new to the world.
Um, whenever, however, whenever language showed up, um, did it break with all of cognitive tradition in some sense and come up with this idea of a discrete category, discrete something or another discrete tokens, um, that, that, um, that is nothing really discrete.
Really discrete maybe happens, um, in the brain.
It's maybe fuzzy all over, um, as opposed to the digital, right?
So the digital realm, the symbolic realm is, has, has this idea of, of truly discrete things.
And so, yeah, one way to, one way to phrase it is a little more generally, right?
Is this, does, is anything discrete really happened in the brain slash mind?
Um, and you could say maybe decision-making, I think decision-making is a good example.
Like we either decide to eat something or not.
Uh, there's, there's many, many, many decision points, uh, that we have to, we have to make decisions all the time.
And those decisions are often, you know, they're, they're binary or if not binary, they're, they're, they're discrete, right?
You can't both eat the donut and not eat it, right?
You can't have your cake and eat it too.
It's a perfect example.
You can't both eat the cake and keep the cake.
Well, now you're getting into the, the territory of the nature of paradox.
Our paradox is real.
And is that paradoxical?
Like the liar's paradox, right?
Yes.
And, and actually.
And could you say there's something about language that lets you tap into paradoxical space?
So that's, so that's, no, what I would say is, is the opposite.
That paradoxes arise only in language.
And it's because language doesn't really operate that we, we think it does.
And, and it would be a great conversation for, for, we should do it.
We should certainly do an episode about just this.
Exploring the space of paradox.
This sentence is false, right?
These kinds of things.
And it's because we have this illusion that language reaches outside of itself.
And there is some fact about this thing called this sentence about the words true or false.
And then this sentence is referring to itself.
But if you simply let go of the notion of true reference,
then I think it might ultimately make the liar's paradox and many paradoxes.
That's probably the best one.
It's the one that would girdle really built the entire incompleteness theorem on.
And it's this idea of self-reference.
If you simply let go of reference in a, in a fundamental way and just think of language as kind of not doing reference, but just doing coherent generation, then these paradoxes might disappear.
They may not be paradoxes at all.
They, they, they may have the illusion of paradox and the, but the illusion may be.
Are, are paradoxes observer dependent?
So they're not supposed to be right.
And it's because it's supposed to really be, uh, the, the language.
It's supposed to sort of have objectively objective meaning, right?
This sentence is false.
It's not dependent.
It doesn't depend on who's, who's talking.
Um, right.
I am a liar.
I am a liar is a different one and kind of a different version of that where, you know, you have liars and truth tellers and somebody says I'm a liar.
They can't both be a liar.
I mean, more so in the, the nature of, of, of a way a mind is experiencing computation, intelligence, embodiment, all those kinds of things where it's like, people will say, like people will have all sorts of, you know, when you, when you hold two ideas that don't normally go together in your mind, they're kind of paradoxical until you find a way to resolve it.
Okay.
Just going to information.
Yeah.
Give me an example, like holding two ideas in your mind.
Yeah.
So I'll, let's just say I I'm, uh, I'm talking to someone and they're, they're a little slick and they start to, to make, they start to say some things that sound like they could be, you know, false or something.
When you say something doesn't make sense, it's almost like it's paradoxical.
Like, I don't see how this leads to this.
These shouldn't, these don't go together.
They're kind of paradoxical.
And in order to resolve that, you have to insert, generate a piece of information that resolves that paradox.
Right.
And a lot of times that's also how we, we make decisions, right?
We have all these decisions to make, which are various different, you know, paths and even paradoxical, like, should I go left to right up or down?
You're all kind of opposing each other and the nature of making, of generating a decision, generating a path is ultimately selecting that thing and resolving the paradox.
Right.
And this is sort of even meta when we're talking about paradoxical statements, like the liar's paradox as well.
Right.
Okay.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
Go ahead.
Go ahead.
Finish with that, please.
I'm sorry.
No, I was going to say, like, in the case of like, if a lawyer is going through something, right, you know, they're looking through all these statements.
And the nature of a paradox arises in their mind when they see that things aren't going together.
Right.
They think, oh, this is paradoxical.
This doesn't make sense.
We don't see how this could either be.
And what I'm saying is that if you have a different kind of mind, there's things that don't seem paradoxical.
And then to others, there's things that seem more paradoxical.
If someone doesn't understand something and doesn't know the structure behind it, it seems paradoxical to them.
They don't see how these things go together or result in this thing.
Do you see what I'm getting at?
Yes, yes.
Yeah.
So there are a couple of things that I want to respond to.
So there's a notion of paradox is, you know, these kind of special cases.
And it's where sort of language eats itself or something like that.
And I think they may be a kind of special class.
And I think my intuition is that they're a particular language.
But there are also, you know, you mentioned, you know, you certainly have conflicting information.
Right. And we call that a paradox.
But let's say you have reason to believe X and you have other reason to believe not X.
Like, I don't know.
Let's pick a nice controversial topic, but not too controversial.
You know, we landed on the moon.
And you have lots of evidence to suggest maybe we landed on the moon.
But then people point out contrary evidence.
So the flag is moving.
It looks like wind.
There's some videos.
Stanley Kubrick did it.
Stanley Kubrick.
Like, what the heck was those fake videos of moon landings and what's going on?
And so you have these you have these various different sources of evidence.
And then you're trying to make some sort of behavioral decision.
Maybe the behavior is just as simple as saying, I believe that we did land on the moon.
I don't believe we land on the moon based on those kinds of conflicting sources of information.
And I think you're touching on something definitely very profound in terms of sort of the original conversation we're having, which is, and it's sort of like categories, does the mind ultimately require some sort of internal consistency?
Is it possible?
Is it possible?
So, so here, and this is great because I'm realizing, like, what's the issue at hand, right?
We can easily hold that there's these different conflicting pieces of evidence.
And they're, they're both are true.
There's this kind of evidence.
There's that kind of evidence.
And then we can say, well, which one do you believe?
And maybe the answer is, you don't have a specific concrete belief.
And it's sort of like the category idea, you don't have a binary belief.
Maybe beliefs aren't binary at all.
But when you say to somebody, what do you believe, you have to go and turn it into something that is not, that is rigid.
I have to say, I believe this, or I don't.
And in that sense, I think our culture and our, certainly linguistic kind of way of framing our mind, even thinking about our own minds, requires that we do this kind of resolution, right?
And we have to think, well, you know, on the one hand, this and that, but on the other hand, this and that, I better come up with what I believe.
I better resolve this. And what that means is to say, I'm going to dismiss the contrary evidence and I'm going to embrace the positive evidence or vice versa or whatever.
Here's the other thought experiment.
I think we've spoken about this before, right?
So think of, you know, let's just say you have an apple and an orange, right?
Just an apple, red apple and, you know, an orange, right?
What is an apple?
Yeah.
What is the nature of the apple, right?
The forbidden fruit.
Anyways, the apple and the orange.
In what way is it not paradoxical to say you have two of something?
Well, you can't say you have two apples or two oranges.
You can now create this variance between them.
And you can say, oh, well, I have two fruits.
I have two fruits.
Right.
And that can, you know, obviously be extrapolated to a million different things, but it's only in the nature.
That's linguistically a way of resolving it.
Right.
But my, my contention is that there was never, you know, the only tension there is because of language.
Right.
Like you can't have, you don't have two apples and you don't have two oranges and you don't have two, then what do you have two of anything?
Oh, we have to go and make a more general term that encapsulates both of these because there seemed to be two of something.
But to our visual system, there was never a problem.
But isn't it, isn't it weird though, though, that you can say you have more of something if you generalize it.
Right.
I can't actually say I have more of something than just the pieces, unless I create this thing called a category.
Well, a more general category, but even more of something, but, but more of something is, is, is, is again, it's, it's, it's a linguistic construct.
And, and it almost inherently, and it does inherently implies a category more of, well, you have to have a kind of, you know, some, the, the, the term, it only, it's an argument for more of, it's open parentheses, something.
Um, and, and that something has to, uh, it can only, it only works if it's, if it's a category, um, it could be a category of, uh, you know, a very, very narrow category.
Uh, more of this particular, can't be more of this very particular atom, but it could be more of, you know, these types of atoms or something like that.
I was more saying, because this, this seems to deal with the, the nature of mathematics itself.
If there's something about mathematics, that's very, very fundamental to this structure of reality and all that types of stuff.
Like, why is it that this is, this is the way things work and not some other way.
And I don't, I don't think it's just playing philosophically.
I mean, it is, it definitely is.
We're on the playground, throwing things around.
We're definitely doing that, but there's also something else I feel that we're tapping into when we're talking about that idea.
Well, it sounds like I think you're, you're more of a, of a categorical realist or something like that.
Um, maybe, um, and, and by the way, I'm, I'm, I'm, I, I do play, I'm playing devil's advocate to some extent.
And I always am.
I'm, I'm playing, you know, I'm playing devil's advocate with my entire theory.
I mean, that's what, that's what makes this stuff more fun.
And, and it, and it, and it should be like that.
Um, you know, that's the, the, the goal here is, is to back things around.
And smack them around and see what sticks and see what falls apart and all of that.
Exactly.
Um, but you know, math and, and you're, you're, you know, it's, I have to process exactly, but yes, the fact that math is, is obviously a human construct.
It's, it is very, very, it's like pure discrete symbols.
Um, even though we came up with symbols for non-discrete things.
Um, but in some sense, the symbols themselves are, are discrete.
Like, you know, you can have a, put a bar on top and it's a repeating number.
So there's, there's, it's an irrational and you've, you know, you've made a symbol for something irrational that can't really be symbolized.
Um, and sort of in, in, in the conventional sense.
Um, but barring that there, there, it seems to draw heavily.
Uh, it's, it's certainly strongly inspired by language.
Um, you know, we have terms for things and then now we have terms for abstract things.
Uh, and now we have terms, now we have a symbol for apples.
Well, we have a symbol for the number five, whatever that means.
Um, but, but then just like, uh, the, the language models, right?
The, the math runs on its own to, to a large extent, right?
You have piano's axioms and you get arithmetic and, and, and it's just does its thing, uh, internally.
Um, without any reference, right?
Five doesn't have to refer to anything outside of the system itself.
Not five of anything.
If the, if, if, if there was no material objects in the world, you'd still have the number five.
It would sort of have mathematics.
Um, it doesn't need to necessarily be tethered to this physical.
Uh, it does not, it does not.
And it's almost, you know, in some sense by design or, and that's the, that's the beauty of it.
It's why you could have five of anything.
Um, because you could have five of nothing.
The reason you can have five of anything and the word five means five without is because it could be really just, it's sort of a standalone thing.
Um, so yes, it's removed and divorced in some sense from the physical, but it is, is discrete symbolic.
And it's certainly inspired by, by words.
Um, and so you're saying, well, okay, math is so effective in doing things like prediction and, and, and being able to, uh, sort of account for, um, even physical kinds of phenomena.
So doesn't that mean the world kind of works on symbols, right?
And so you're taking, maybe take a, taking a pre pro, uh, discrete symbolic stand based on the, on the, the sheer, um, efficacy of math and saying, look, no, the world runs on symbols.
And people, people have certainly made this kind of case.
And, uh, you know, there's a book I encountered a long time ago.
Um, somebody, I can't remember the name of the philosopher.
I shouldn't know it, but you know, making the case that, uh, you know, the efficacy of math shows that God himself is a mathematician.
Oh, the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics kind of thing.
Exactly.
Um, it's not exactly that one, but the, the, but yeah, the, and somebody, you know, that's, that's like, you know, God used language to create the world and like math to create the world or something like that.
Um, and so that's, it's interesting perspective, but it's obviously needs a lot of, uh, needs to be dragged out into the light and, and made, uh, a lot more explicit about what those kinds of claims really are.
And, you know, my argument is that we have, uh, I, I use the term, uh, what was it?
We have anthropomorphization.
It's lingual, lingual promorphization.
Actually, I had two new terms today, this, this morning's conversation, the linguosphere, which is the real world that we, the world that humans live in is, is largely the linguosphere, not, uh, the biosphere or, or, you know, it's not an ecosystem.
It's a lingual system.
Um, and then we take language to, to have the kind of realism, realism to it, where we use linguistic kind of concepts like discrete labels in thinking about other things.
And I'm not getting warfy in here.
I'm talking about like sort of scientific reasoning about stuff and, and, you know, this kind of conversation.
Um, and so, and, and, and sort of, uh, you know, uh, the way we try to explain the world, even, you know, just scientifically or philosophically is that we, we, we take these ideas like linguistic ideas, and then we impose them elsewhere.
And, and math is another one, math works so well, um, that the universe is fundamentally mathematical.
Um, I'm very suspicious of that kind of thinking, and I'm more suspicious than I ever was because I'm now seeing, once you see that language, you sort of see the trick and you see that language isn't really doing what we thought.
Um, it makes me skeptical that we may be overgeneralizing from language to outside of itself.
And similarly, we may be overgeneralizing from math outside of itself.
If you remember what some of our first conversations about this is I put the sort of wild thing that I think everything could kind of be a language and I'm certainly not the first person.
That's the extreme opposite of you, right? Yeah. Right. Yeah. And, and, and the reason I say that, and if, if it is even remotely helpful for, for anything, it's, it's, you know, when I think of the whole coordination thing about like, okay, a sports team, I think of that because that's these, you're dealing with parts that are supposed to be higher in independence and agency and whatever. Right.
And when you think of how they're actually forming the sports team, there's like this collect, when you say there's a collective, that's almost like a categorization, like a dynamical categorization. Right. And what a categorization is in that case is coordination. It's, it's communication. It's a language.
Each of those players is finding something inside them that allows them to connect to the other thing inside of the other player. Right. Now, in this case, we're, we're doing that through what we think are our brains and all that kind of stuff. Right. And then the different modalities of our brain and sensory experience and all that.
But if you think about like, how do you, there's so many different facets of say a human, for instance, we'll just use a human, human intelligence. Right. There's so many different things that you could tap into that allow you to communicate. Right. There's, there's an olfactory language. There's visual languages. There's all these sorts of things. There are these things that we call, you know, intuition and rhythm and so many millions of different things.
And what coordination is doing in this very abstract linguistic sense, I sort of equate all of them, is that you're tapping into the space of possible ways to connect different things. Right. And the example I give also is like Lego bricks. Like if you have a one studded Lego brick, there's only so many different ways you're going to be able to take a shot every time you mention Lego, by the way.
Okay. You can do that too. And now when you, when you mention a linguosphere, I'll also take a, take a shot every time you mentioned the new one is, you know, with the Lego, there's only so many different ways you could, you could connect them with each other. Right. And when you have more complicated systems, like, I mean, from bacteria to, to mice and dogs and cats to humans and AI or whatever, is now there's so many different possible ways to connect with the system.
And what coordination is doing is it's, you get the different pieces, the different nodes, the different minds, trying to solve a specific goal. And that goal is what dictates how they're connected, which of those things they're tapping into.
If you're solving a goal that requires visual capabilities, you're probably going to want to communicate and coordinate visually a lot of the time. Right. But if you're, if you're dealing in some other sensory modality or some other space of interacting with the world, you're now going to tap into a different way of communicating and coordinating. Right.
You know, for instance, if, if humans had some sense of, you know, you know, people have, have theorized that humans may have some kind of ability to sense magnetism. And, you know, I, I wouldn't say it's, it's, I'd say that that could totally be a real thing. Right.
Right. And, and maybe we just need to look more into this, but, you know, imagine if, if the sports team and the F1 driver going around, they had such a sense of, of, of, of magnetism and where they were spatially that they didn't need to have all these other gadgets.
And that would be their, their interface of communicating and coordinating and solving a goal and a problem and generating things. They're generating things in that medium. Right. When we're saying the nice, the nice thing about language though, is that you can reach outside of the main thing that you're, you're distinctly operating in. Right. So I could be talking about a glass and describing it visually, but there's also a million other ways you could be interfacing with this thing that we call a glass. Are you seeing some of the, the ways I'm trying to.
But I, but I, but I, but I, I want to, and we've talked about this a little bit before, but I want you to consider the possibility that what you're, what you're referring to is not language at all. And that, you know, these kind of coordination, media of coordination could potentially be operating in a very different way than we think of as language as operating.
Because as you point out, because as you point out, the language has this, has this e-modal kind of property, right? A cup is, it's a visual cup and it's a tactile cup and it's, and it's a non-cup, right? And it's, it's everything that's not a cup too, because when you say everything besides a cup and all of that, that is a very disembodied.
And, and, and, and, and, and, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's medium agnostic.
It's modality agnostic and that's language. Language certainly it's, and it's a great point, right? That language has this, this kind of property to it that it allows for sort of coordination across a lot, across less, certainly sensory perceptual kinds of modalities.
But then when you're talking about the other kinds of coordination, like visual coordination or, or like, you know, members of a team and they're, they're reading off of each other's bodies, how they're moving and things like that.
Those things are very embodied and very modal in some sense in a way that language isn't.
So is it the right terminology to refer to those things as other kinds of languages or perhaps they're of a completely different sort of thing relative to what we really think of language being,
which is these disembodied, completely immodal, purely symbolic kinds of coordination systems. Something to think about.
I have to let that marinate. Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, I know you've mentioned for us a fascinating idea to talk about these other languages, like an olfactory language.
Is it language in the same sense? I think maybe you're using, you're using language more generally.
I'm not, I'm not, I'm not mocking your use of the term. What I'm trying, what I'm trying to get at here is whether what we call language language may be this very specific, you know,
and is it really very different potentially? We're going to have to end in one minute because I'm going to be like, yeah,
one minute to make sure everything's.
Okay. So final, final, leave people on a cliffhanger. What to expect for the next conversation?
Uh, okay. Um, so we're going to be talking, well, isn't it, by the time they watch this, the conversation will have happened.
Yeah. The Wolfram thing would have happened. Then our thing is done. Now, what can you leave them for the next one?
Oh, oh, very nice. The third in the trilogy.
Well, here's, what's really been on my mind, but it is a big bite to take out of the apple.
Um, which is whether really we are dichotomous in the sense that are we, are we sensory, perceptual, feeling, acting, animal systems,
and is language operating within us with its own culture, uh, societal designs?
Is there a great battle being pitched inside of us? Um, do we want to eat that donut, but our medical knowledge
knowledge and our notion of our, uh, of our reputation in, you know, by being overweight or whatever it is
that is maybe linguistically instantiated? Are these at war with it within us? And we all feel those push and pulls
of these different, you know, we want to do this, but we shouldn't, but we shouldn't, right? What's the ought?
Where's the should come from? Is that a linguistic construct? Um, and if so, is that sort of the big story, uh,
of humanity as, as the, um, of knowing, knowing between good and evil, right? The apple, I didn't use
the apple, uh, uh, uh, completely arbitrarily, although it probably wasn't an apple, but the tree
of knowledge of knowledge between good and evil. What kind of knowledge is that? Is it linguistic
knowledge? Is it implanted on us that certain things should and shouldn't be done? And is that the pull
of morality, which is perhaps a societal construct fighting against our animal tendencies, which are,
I want to eat that freaking apple, or I want to do this or that thing that I shouldn't do based on
societal concerns. So that's what I've really been thinking about a lot lately. I think it's,
it's a biggie. Um, and it's pretty far, uh, a farther extension from, uh, the fairly technical
model of, uh, language and cognition, but deep down is the thing I think, uh, I care about most.
Yeah, this is, this would make for a very fascinating discussion. I could already think
of what Dr. Hahn would be, would be saying in response to all of this. I know he has many
thoughts as always. Oh yeah, we'd be nodding along. Yeah. We got to get DBZ, William, Michael,
maybe Dugan, got lots of cool people we can bring in for that conversation. Well, maybe,
maybe we'll book that in the next couple of days. Let's do it. It's, it's all right. No time like
the present. That's right. All right, Alon, I will see you extremely shortly. Okay. We're doing
non-linear storytelling. This is non-linear. It's going to tie into this. It's going to tie into
something that hasn't happened yet. You're going to forget which one you watched first or last.
And that's, yeah, it'll be what Lucas, George Lucas had to do to make the prequels work for the,
the, the original trilogy. Yeah. Anyways. All right. All right. I'll see you in basically a minute.
Thanks, Danny. All right. See you.
